---

published: false

layout: review
date: 2010-10-08 0:0:0 +0700
cover: "the-darkest-hour.jpg"
olid:  # if no image (Open Library ID)
isbn: # if no olid (dashes are optional)
title: "The Darkest Hour"
author: Erin Hunter
year: 2004
status: Finished 

---

The compelling literary element of this book is the characters. This is because they are cats and that is a very unique character choice. This book is action. There is a lot of fighting, adventure and suspense.
I will now give you examples of piece of good description/dialog. When Firestar loses one life. it enplanes how he felt and I could really picture it in my mind. When dustpelt tries to kill sorellkit you could almost feel the certainty in his voice. The last one is when all the "half-clan" cats are a bout to be executed. 
Questions and comments: 1)Why did scrooge kill firestar? 2)How do think it would feel to lose a life? 3) Will the forest dramatically change? 4) Who will be the new deputy. 
I can relate this book to myself, the word, and other books. I can relate this book to myself because I have cats and cats are the main characters. I can relate this book to the world because there is so much death and violence. I can relate this book to The lord of the flies because it has a lot of violence.
I think this book was very good. It had good description and detail. The book also had a good plot and setting. Some good description is when firestar dies. Some good detail is the agony that the cats feel. The plot of this book is cats trying to survive in the forest. The setting is a forest. That is why I think this book is good (and gave it 5 stars).
