---

published: true

layout: review
date: 2010-11-25 0:0:0 +0700
cover: "the-wild-things.jpg"
olid:  # if no image (Open Library ID)
isbn: # if no olid (dashes are optional)
title: "The Wild Things"
author: Dave Eggers
year: 2018
status: Finished 

---

The genre of this book is fantasy/action. I know it is fantasy because there are no such things as “Wild Things”. It is also action because it has a lot of action; like the war or Douglas’s arm being torn off.  Those are the genres of this book.

The compelling literary element of this book is the plot. My proof for that is because the thing that stands out the most is the plot. One reason is because Max runs away from home and ends up on an island with wild things living on it. Another reason is that the plot is the most compelling literary element is because the plot is very hard to unravel and is very hard to figure out. My last reason is that the plot has a lot of action and that is the way a plot should be. That is why the plot is the most compelling literary element.
One of the parts I gave particular interest to in the book was on P.G. 257. I like it because Carol thinks the sun is dead and then Douglas and Carol start to get in a fight because of it. I think Douglass and Carol are always fighting, and I think it is funny that there fighting over this to.  That is why I like it. Another page I like is page 285 when Max is just watching his mother rest. I like that because Max and his mom are always fighting and at the end they make up. The other page I liked was page 284 because it is when he gets home. I like that because he never wants to see his family but at the end he dose.

Some questions I have for the book are: What is Maxes father like? What dose Max do when he gets home? What dose Clare feel like when Max gets home? What dose Max’s mom do when he gets home? What did Clare and Max’s mom do when Max was away? Those are my questions for this book.

I can connect this book to the Bahamas because there are a lot of rocks on the island. To Colorado because there are a lot of animals there. And to New Zeeland because there are a lot of volcanoes there
