---

published: false

layout: review
date: 2010-11-13 0:0:0 +0700
cover: "the-hunger-games.jpg"
olid:  # if no image (Open Library ID)
isbn: # if no olid (dashes are optional)
title: "The Hunger Games"
author: Suzanne Collins
year: 2008
status: Finished 

---

This book was one of the best action & adventure books I ever read. Katnis is a girl that lives in district 12. She has a sister named Prim. Prim gets chosen for the  hunger games and Katnis takes her place. She has to fight to death on live TV. That is how Katniss Evergreen starts her adventure. I liked the setting and the characters.  I like the setting because it is so much like the forest and it also has a bad economy. I like the characters because they are so realistic. The characters also are not very successful but they have enough to survive. Some of my favorite parts are when Peta learns that he accidentally kills Foxface on p.g. 318, when Kattnis finds the cave on p.g. 260 & when Kattnis is surveying the landscape on p.g. 148. Some of my questions are:
1) How do you think Kattnis feels about both she & Peeta winning?
2) How do you think Gale feels about Kattnises actions towards Peeta?
3) Do you think that the mutations have the dead tributes real eyes?
4) If you were to draw a map of the United States in the same era that the book takes place in, where would the capital be?
5) When Kattnis kills the boy from District 3, do you think that she's thinking about what she is doing or is she acting out of anger over the death of Rue?
I relate this book to:
1) The forest because the Hunger Games has a forest.
2) Star Wars because it reminds me of Sith fighting Jedi.  The Careers are the Sith because they are so strong and the Jedi are like the rest because they don't work together but its like they are part of a rebellion.
3) I relate the capital to Colorado because it has lots of mountains. 
That concludes my review of "The Hunger Games" by Suzanne Collins.
