---

published: false

layout: review
date: 2012-01-03 0:0:0 +0700
cover: "the-hobbit.jpg"
olid:  # if no image (Open Library ID)
isbn: # if no olid (dashes are optional)
title: "The Hobbit"
author: J.R.R. Tolkien
year: 2002
status: Finished 

---

The genre of this book is action and adventure. Their is a big adventure that the book takes place around. Their is also a big war that is just one of the climaxes. Those are just some examples to prove my point of the genre. Now I will give you a summary of this book: A hobbit goes on a wild adventure with a group of dwarves and a wizard. During this they have meany encounters with evil and meany bumps in the road but they still prevail and have a successful end to their journey. The compelling literary element of this book is the plot. One reason is that it has very good detail. Another is how the plot is formed. In the book, the plot is formed on step at a time. My last reason is that the plot is very deep. this makes for a good book. Some of my favorite parts are:The picture of the war of five army's in the third to last chapter, When Bilbo gets home, and when the dragon dies. Some of the questions I have for this book are: Will anyone remember Bilbo? Will he become famous? Will anyone remember the dragon? What are the other books like? Will spiders attack more hobbits? I can relate this book the the world. One of the reasons is that they both have a variety of different animals. I can relate this book to Eragon. One reason is that it has magic. Another is that they both have dragons. The last thing I can relate this book to is Warrior cats.Both have talking animals. That is my review of the hobbit.
