---

published: false

layout: review
date: 2011-12-02 0:0:0 +0700
cover: "the-light-in-the-forest.jpg"
olid:  # if no image (Open Library ID)
isbn: # if no olid (dashes are optional)
title: "The Light in the Forest"
author: Conrad Richter
year: 1983
status: Finished 

---

<b>The Light in the Forest</b> is an <u>okay</u> book. Its genre is adventure. In the book, the main character is white skin and was adopted by the Indians. The character, although he doesn't want to, has to go back to his white village. That is the main point of this book. The compelling literary element of this book is the characters. The characters are a main factor in this book. The are very well described and detailed. For example, the author always expresses the characters feelings. Also, the characters are very diverse. They are diverse in nationality and thought. Two of the different nationalities are White people and Native American. One of my favorite parts of this book is when True Son goes to his white family. I think that shows the results of being kidnapped as a result of war and then coming back to your original family. Another good part is when True Son and Half Arrow scalp Uncle Willis. This shows how far revenge can go. Also, I liked when True Son and Half Arrow where in the woods. I think it was a good place for the characters to bond even more. Some of my questions are: 1) What do you think would happen in the sequel, if there is one? 2) Do you think there will ever be peace between the natives and the whites? 3)What will happen to True Son when he gets back to his white village? 4) Who Will most likely take True Son's place? 5)Was this book educational? Why? I can relate this book to many things. One is the world. In the past, the natives and the whites have fought and killed each other. I can also relate this book to other books. One is <b> The Talking Earth </b>. They are both about Native Americans. Another book is <b> The Lord of the Flies.</b> In both stories a kid ends up in a unfamiliar place. That's my review for <b>The Light in the Forest.</b>
