---

published: false

layout: review
date: 2012-12-12 0:0:0 +0700
cover: "a-long-walk-to-water.jpg"
olid:  # if no image (Open Library ID)
isbn: # if no olid (dashes are optional)
title: "A Long Walk to Water"
author: Linda Sue Park
year: 1985
status: Finished 

---

Linda Sue Park is the author of the novel “A Long Walk to Water." She is a Stanford graduate with a degree in English. She also has won the Newbery Award for the book "Single Shard." The genre of the book " A Long Walk to Water" is historical fiction. It is an adventure story about two Sudanese kids, Salva and Nya, who have to live through the Sudanese civil war. The narrator of this book is the author and the book is written in the third person limited point of view. This writing style affected the story because I could tell that the book took place in the past, not in the present.

The setting of this book shows the culture and ethnicity of people in Sudan. This book takes place in a southern Sudanese town called Loun Ariik where Salva was born and raised, a refuge camp in Ethiopia, two refuge camps in Kenya, Rochester New York where Salva currently resides, and another small town in South Sudan. The period the book takes place is from 1985-2010. This affects the story because it takes place in a war zone and it keeps the story moving and unpredictable. This is why the story could not have taken place anywhere else. 

Salva and Nya are the main characters in the book "A Long Walk to Water."  The supporting characters are Jewiir (Salva's uncle), Salva's father, Salva's mother, Akeer (Nya's sister), and Dep (Nya's brother).  Salva is very loyal to his family and will face any problem that comes his way. Salva is special because he is a born leader. Nya is very helpful. One of Nya's strengths is she never gives up and she always helps her family. Jewiir is a very loyal uncle who will do anything he can to protect Salva. A strength of Jewiir is he is always willing to take risks to do the right thing. Salvas parents are very caring towards their children. Akeer is very lovable. Her weakness is that she is small and vulnerable. Dep is very protective. These are all the characters in "A Long Walk to Water."

The protagonist’s in "A Long Walk to Water" are Salva and Nya. The antagonist’s for both characters are the war and the desert. The supporting characters help give the protagonist's motivation to keep moving forward. The story starts with Salva having to run away from home because of the war going on in his country. The rising action of Salva's story is when he joins up with other refugees and finds his uncle Jewiir. The climaxes are when Uncle Jewiir dies, when Salva reaches the first refuge camp, and when Salva has to cross the Gilo River.  The falling action is when Salva travels to other refuge camps with the lost boys of Sudan. The resolution happens when Salva comes to America and starts his own business. For Nya, the story begins when she has to go to a well to get water. The rising action happens when her family moves to the lake near her village. The climax occurs when Akeer gets sick and has to go to the medical clinic. The falling action happens when Nya has to return to her routine of getting water from the well. The resolution is a new well is built in her village and she starts going to school for the first time.

"A Long Walk to Water" has many themes. One theme is never give up. This is because in the desert, Salva has to keep on walking even when he has no energy left in him. Another theme is war brings nothing but loss and fear. An example from the book is when Salva has to leave the school and run to the bush. The last theme in the book is you need to make sacrifices to survive. I say this because Nya has to sacrifice every day to get water for her family to survive.  A motif in the book "A Long Walk to Water" is water; Nya has to fetch water, there isn't water in the desert, when Salva has to cross the Gobi River, and Akeer gets sick from drinking water.

I enjoyed the book "A Long Walk to Water" because it takes place during the Sudanese war. It covers a lot of the history of the war and it describes what it was like for the Sudanese people to live during the war. I also enjoyed the book because it weaved two excellent stories together. The most compelling literary element was the character development. The author created complex characters that are described perfectly and have unique backstories. I recommend this book to 3rd-6th graders who like reading about children in other countries.