---

published: false

layout: review
date: 2012-10-02 12:34:56 +0700
cover: "fabelhaven.jpg"
olid:  # if no image (Open Library ID)
isbn:  # if no olid (dashes are optional)
title: "Fablehaven"
author: Brandon Mull
year: 2006
status: Finished 

---

The author of Fablehaven is Brandon Mull. He also wrote the Bonders series. It is about a boy who gets teleported into another dimension that is ruled by an evil wizard. The genre of Fablehaven is Fiction. The subgenre is mystery. The point of view is first person and it switches of between characters ever chapter. This affected the story because you the personalities of the main characters. Fablehaven is a book that takes place at Kendra and Seth’s grandparents house and when they start exploring the property, they find out that there is more then what meets the eye on their grandparents land.

Fablehaven takes place in Seth and Kendra’s grandparents house and on Fablehaven. Both of the settings take place in the isolated country. It takes place in modern time. The setting changes the plot of the story because the book could only take place on isolated land. This is because the book deals with out of the ordinary creatures that need to be kept away from society.

The main characters in this book are Seth Serson who’s strength is being adventurous and that is also his weakness, Kendra Serson who’s strength is being smart and her weakness is being afraid, Stan Serson (grandpa) who’s strength is being educated and his weakness is being old, and Ruth Serson (grandma) who‘s strength is being kind and her weakness is being old. They are all related and they all now the truth behind Fablehaven.  Seth is adventurous and brave, Kendra is smart and protective, Stan is secretive and fun, and Ruth is fun and serious. The supporting characters are Dale (friend), Lena (housemaid), and Hugo (golem). They all work on Fablehaven. 

The protagonists are all of the Serson. The antagonist is the evening star. The beginning of this book starts off with the Serson kids going to their grandparent’s house because their parents are going on a cruse. The rising action is when the kids drink the milk and realize there is more that meets the eye to Fablehaven. The climax is when the evening star releases Bahamut. The falling action is when they get the house fixed. The resolution is when the parents come and pick them up. 

The moral of Fablehaven is you can do anything if you just try.  For example, when Kendra wants to save her family she gets a magical potion but needs to find out how to use it. She keeps on trying and trying until the problem is solved.

I really enjoyed reading Fablehaven.  It was a grate book and it had a very good balance between the plot, the setting, the characters, and the theme. I believe that the best literary element was the plot because it was very exciting and you could never tell what would happen next. My favorite part of the book was the chapter when they recapture Bahamut. This is because it is the climax of the story and it is very intense.  I would recommend this book for children in middle school grades and above.
