---
published: true

layout: review
date: 2024-11-04 0:0:0 +0700
cover: "zhuangzi.jpg"
olid:  # if no image (Open Library ID)
isbn: # if no olid (dashes are optional)
title: "Basic Writings"
author: Zhuangzi
translator: Burton Watson
year: 2003
status: Finished
---
Here I have attempted to compile a portion of Zhuangzi's thoughts on epistemological and ontological questions that arise in the study of mathematics. 


## On The Law of the Excluded Middle
> Everything has its “that,” everything has its “this.” From
the point of view of “that,” you cannot see it; but through
understanding, you can know it. So I say, “that” comes out
of “this,” and “this” depends on “that”—which is to say that
“this” and “that” give birth to each other... Therefore the
sage does not proceed in such a way but illuminates all in
the light of Heaven. He, too, recognizes a “this” but a
“this” that is also “that,” a “that” that is also “this.” His
“that” has both a right and a wrong in it; his “this,” too, has
both a right and a wrong in it... A state in which “this” and “that” no
longer find their opposites is called the hinge of the Way.
When the hinge is fitted into the socket, it can respond
endlessly. Its right, then, is a single endlessness, and its
wrong, too, is a single endlessness. So I say, the best thing
to use is clarity. (35)

> Now I am going to make a statement here. I don’t know
whether or not it fits into the category of other people’s
statements. But whether it fits into their category or
whether it doesn’t, it obviously fits into some category. So
in that respect, it is no different from their statements.
However, let me try making my statement. (38)

## On Proofs of Indirection
> To use a horse to show that a
horse is not a horse is not as good as using a non-horse to
show that a horse is not a horse. (35)

> “The fish trap exists because of the fish; once you’ve
gotten the fish, you can forget the trap. The rabbit snare
exists because of the rabbit; once you’ve gotten the rabbit,
you can forget the snare. Words exist because of meaning;
once you’ve gotten the meaning, you can forget the words.
Where can I find a man who has forgotten words so I can
have a word with him? (141)

## On Computational Complexity
> Ziqi of Nanbo was wandering around the Hill of Shang
when he saw a huge tree there, different from all the rest. A
thousand teams of horses could have taken shelter under it,
and its shade would have covered them all. Ziqi said, “What
tree is this? It must certainly have some extraordinary
usefulness!” But looking up, he saw that the smaller limbs
were gnarled and twisted, unfit for beams or rafters, and
looking down, he saw that the trunk was pitted and rotten
and could not be used for coffins. He licked one of the
leaves, and it blistered his mouth and made it sore. He
sniffed the odor, and it was enough to make a man drunk for
three days. “It turns out to be a completely unusable tree,”
said Ziqi, “and so it has been able to grow this big. Aha!—it
is this unusableness that the Holy Man makes use of!” (60)

> “Calculate what man knows, and it cannot compare with
what he does not know... Yet man
takes something so small and tries to exhaust the
dimensions of something so large! (100)

## On Data Sparsity
> Therefore great wisdom observes both far and near, and for
that reason, it recognizes small without considering it
paltry, recognizes large without considering it unwieldy, for
it knows that there is no end to the weighing of things. (99)

> Ruo of the North Sea said, “If from the standpoint of the
minute, we look at what is large, we cannot see to the end.
If from the standpoint of what is large, we look at what is
minute, we cannot distinguish it clearly. The minute is the
smallest of the small, the gigantic is the largest of the
large, and it is therefore convenient to distinguish between
them. (100)