---
layout: post
title: BIE
date:   2015-03-15 16:40:16
description: march & april, looking forward to summer
tags: math
categories: draft
giscus_comments: true
---
# Introduction

This blog post is adapted from a Student Forum talk I gave on 10/11/24.

Sections [2](#sec:riesz) and [3](#sec:potential) will cover the functional analytic foundations of integral equations and the theory of potential theory, respectively. Section [4](#sec:numerical) will cover the numerical aspects of the Boundary Integral Equation (BIE) method, and Section [4.2](#sec:iterative) will cover iterative methods and fast summation techniques. Sections [2](#sec:riesz), [3](#sec:potential) and [4](#sec:numerical) are based on the work of Kress [@Kress_1999], while Sections and [4.2](#sec:iterative) are based on the work of Martinsson [@Martinsson_2019]. I have tried to adhere to the notation conventions of [@Barnett_2024].

# Riesz-Fredholm Theory {#sec:riesz}

We give a brief theory of the operators equations
$$\sigma - A \sigma = (I - A)\sigma = f$$ of the second kind where
$A : X \to X$ is a compact linear operator on a Banach space $X$ and
$f \in X$.

::: theorem
**Theorem 1** (Third Riesz Theorem). *There exists a unique integer,
$r \geq 0$, called the Riesz number of the operator $A$, such that
$$\begin{aligned}
        \{0\} = N((I-A)^0) \subset N((I-A)^1) \subset \cdots \subset N((I-A)^r) = N((I-A)^{r+1}) = \cdots \\
        X = R((I-A)^0) \supset R((I-A)^1) \supset \cdots \supset R((I-A)^r) = R((I-A)^{r+1}) = \cdots.
    
\end{aligned}$$ where the inclusions are strict. Furthermore,
$$X = N(L^r)\oplus L^r(X)$$*
:::

::: {#thrm:inverse .theorem}
**Theorem 2**. *Let $X$ be a normed space, $A: X \to X$ be a compact
linear operator, and let $I-A$ be injective. Then the inverse operator
$(I-A)^{-1}$ exists and is bounded.*
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* Use the Third Riez Theorem for surjectivity, and use
compactness to show that the inverse is bounded. See [@Kress_1999] for
details. ◻
:::

# Potential Theory {#sec:potential}

The theory of integral equations is a powerful tool in solving constant
coefficient elliptic partial differential equations. The theory was
developed, in part (WHERE, WHEN, WHO?), to find solutions to the Laplace
interior Dirichlet problem

::: definition
**Definition 1** (Interior Dirichlet Problem). *Find a function
$u \in C^2(\Omega)\cap C(\overline\Omega)$ such that
$$\label{eq:Laplace}
        \begin{cases}
            \begin{aligned}
            -\Delta u(\pmb x) & =0, & \pmb x\in \Omega\, \\
            u(\pmb x) & = f(\pmb x), &\pmb x\in \Gamma,
            \end{aligned}
            \end{cases}$$ where $\Omega \subset \mathbb R^n$ is some
bounded domain in $C^1$ with boundary $\Gamma = \partial \Omega$ in
$C^2$, $n$ is taken to be $2$ or $3$, and
$f \in C(\mathbb{R}^n; \mathbb{R}^n)$. The fundamental solution to this
problem, which can be constructively obtained using differentiation of
radial forms (CITE) or via the Fourier transform (CITE), is given as*
:::

::: theorem
**Theorem 3** (Fundemental Solution to the Laplace Equation).
*$$\Phi(x,y) = \Phi(\|x-y\|) = \begin{cases}
            \frac{1}{2\pi} \log \frac{1}{\|x-y\|}, & n=2 \\
            \frac{1}{4\pi\|x-y\|}, & n=3.
        \end{cases}$$*
:::

::: theorem
**Theorem 4** (Green's Representation Theorem).
*$$u(x) = \int_{\delta \Omega} \left( \frac{\partial u}{\partial n} \Phi(x,y) - u(y) \frac{\partial \Phi(x,y)}{\partial n(y)} \right) \,\mathrm dS_y, \quad x \in \Omega.$$*
:::

Thus, we are able to express our harmonic $u$ as a function of it's
boundary values and it's normal derivative on the boundary (*cauchy
data*). This is the basis for the Boundary Integral Equation (BIE)
method.

::: theorem
**Theorem 5** (Maximum-Minimum Principle). *A harmonic function on a
domain cannot assume its maximum or its minimum unless it is constant.*
:::

::: theorem
**Theorem 6** (Uniqueness of the Solution). *If a solution to the
interior Dirichlet problem exists, it is unique.*
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* The difference $u=u_1-u_2$ of two solutions to the problem
satisfies the homogeneous Laplace equation and the homogeneous Dirichlet
boundary conditions. By the maximum principle, $u=0$ in $\Omega_-$. ◻
:::

::: definition
**Definition 2**. *Given a function $\sigma \in C(\Gamma)$, the
functions
$$(\mathcal S \sigma)(\pmb x) = \int_{\Gamma} \Phi(\pmb x, \pmb y)\sigma(\pmb y) \,\mathrm ds_{\pmb y}, \quad \pmb x\in \mathbb R^m\setminus \Gamma,$$
and
$$(\mathcal D \sigma)(\pmb x) = \int_{\Gamma} \frac{\partial \Phi(\pmb x, \pmb y)}{\partial n_{\pmb y}}\sigma(\pmb y) \,\mathrm ds_{\pmb y}, \quad \pmb x\in \mathbb R^m\setminus \Gamma,$$
are called the *single-layer* and *double-layer* potentials,
respectively.*
:::

::: {#thrm:jump .theorem}
**Theorem 7** (Jump Relations). *Let $\Gamma \in C^2$ and
$\sigma \in C(\Gamma)$. Then the double-layer potential with density
$\sigma$ satisfies the jump relation
$$(\mathcal{D}\sigma)_\pm(\pmb x) =  \int_{\Gamma} \frac{\partial \Phi(\pmb x, \pmb y)}{\partial n_{\pmb y}}\sigma(\pmb y) \,\mathrm ds_{\pmb y} \pm \frac{1}{2}\sigma(\pmb x), \quad \pmb x\in \Gamma,$$
where
$$(\mathcal{D}\sigma)_\pm(\pmb x) = \lim_{\epsilon \to 0^+} (\mathcal{D}\sigma)(\pmb x\pm \epsilon n(\pmb x))$$
and the integrals exists as improper integrals.*
:::

::: theorem
**Theorem 8**. *The double-layer potential $$\label{eq:potential}
        (\mathcal D \sigma)(\pmb x) = \int_{\Gamma} \frac{\partial \Phi(\pmb x, \pmb y)}{\partial n_{\pmb y}}\sigma(\pmb y) \,\mathrm ds_{\pmb y}, \quad \pmb x\in \Omega,$$
with continuous density $\sigma$ is a solution to the interior Dirichlet
problem provided that $\sigma$ satisfies the Fredholm integral equation
of the second kind $$\label{eq:fredholm}
        \sigma(\pmb x) - 2 \int_\Gamma \frac{\partial \Phi(\pmb x, \pmb y)}{\partial n_{\pmb y}}\sigma(\pmb y) \,\mathrm ds_{\pmb y} = -2f(\pmb x), \quad \pmb x\in \Gamma.$$*
:::

::: theorem
**Theorem 9**. *The interior Dirichlet problem
(eq. [\[eq:Laplace\]](#eq:Laplace){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:Laplace"}) has a unique solution.*
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* By theorem [2](#thrm:inverse){reference-type="ref"
reference="thrm:inverse"}, it is sufficient to show that the operator
$(I - \mathcal D)$ is injective. This follows from the jump relations
theorem [7](#thrm:jump){reference-type="ref" reference="thrm:jump"} on
the boundary. ◻
:::

::: definition
**Definition 3** (Boundary Integral Equation Method). *The *Boundary
Integral Equation* (BIE) method constructively solves the interior
Dirichlet problem by first solving the Fredholm integral equation of the
second kind for the density $\sigma$
(eq. [\[eq:fredholm\]](#eq:fredholm){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:fredholm"}) and then applying the double-layer potential
to the density to obtain the solution potential $u$
(eq. [\[eq:potential\]](#eq:potential){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:potential"}).*
:::

# Numerical Integration {#sec:numerical}

Numerical quadrature methods are used to approximate integrals of the
form $$Q(f) = \int_G w(x)f(x) \,\mathrm dx,$$ where $G$ is some domain
in $\mathbb R^n$ and $w$ is a weight function. We consider quadrature
rules of the form $$Q_n(f) = \sum_{j=1}^N \alpha_j^{(n)} f(x_i^{(n)})$$
with *quadrature points* $\{x_j^{(n)}\}_{j=1}^n \subset G$ and
*quadrature weights* $\{ \alpha_j^{(n)}\}$, where $Q_n(g) \to Q(g)$
pointwise, for all $g \in C(G)$, as $n \to \infty$.

## Nyström's Method

The Nyström method is an approximation of the integral operator
$$(A\sigma)(\pmb x) = \int_G K(\pmb x,\pmb y)\sigma(\pmb y) \,\mathrm d\pmb y, \quad \pmb x\in G,$$
where $K : G \times G \to \mathbb C$ is continuous, by the quadrature
rule
$$(A_n \sigma)(\pmb x) = \sum_{j=1}^N \alpha_j^{(n)} K(\pmb x, \pmb x_j^{(n)})\sigma(\pmb x_j^{(n)}), \quad \pmb x\in G.$$
Thus, our solution to the integral equation of the second kind,
$$(I - A)\sigma = f,$$ is approximated by the discrete system
$$(I_n - A_n)\sigma_n = f_n.$$

Letting
$$A_{ij}^{(n)} = \frac{(\pmb x_i^{(n)}-\pmb y_j^{(n)})\cdot \pmb n(\pmb y_j^{(n)})}{2\pi \|\pmb x_i^{(n)}-\pmb y_j^{(n)}\|^2}\sigma(\pmb y_j^{(n)}), \quad f^{(n)}_i = -2f(\pmb x_i),$$
be our discrete matrix representation of the double-layer potential at
$n$ quadrature points, it follows that the Nyström method applied to the
BIE for the Laplace equation in two dimensions is given by
$$\label{eq:density}
    \sigma(\pmb x_i^{(n)}) - 2 \sum_{j=1}^N \alpha_j^{(n)} A_{ij}^{(n)}\sigma(\pmb y_j^{(n)}) = f^{(n)}_i, \quad i=1,\ldots,N.$$
and the solution to our BVP is given by $$\label{eq:solution}
    u(\pmb x) =  (\mathcal D \sigma)(\pmb x) \approx \sum_{j=1}^N \alpha_j^{(n)} A_{ij}^{(n)}\sigma(\pmb y_j^{(n)}).$$
We write equation [\[eq:density\]](#eq:density){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:density"} in matrix form (modulo quadrature weights) as
$$(I^{(n)} - 2 A^{(n)})\sigma^{(n)} = f^{(n)}$$ and
equation [\[eq:solution\]](#eq:solution){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:solution"} as $$u^{(n)} = A^{(n)}\sigma^{(n)},$$ that is,
our BVP is approximated by first solving our BIE and then applying the
resulting density to the double-layer potential.

## Iterative Methods and Fast Summation Techniques {#sec:iterative}

Given that $A^{(n)}$ is an approximation to a compact operator, we have
that our operator $(I^{(n)}-A^{(n)})$ is a compact perturbation of the
identity whose eigenvalues asymptotically cluster around 1. This
motivates the use of iterative methods, such as GMRES, to solve the
linear system $(I^{(n)}-A^{(n)})\sigma^{(n)} = -2f^{(n)}$.

It is common nowadays to associate BIEs with the use of fast summation
methods, most notably the Fast Multipole Method (FMM) of Greengard and
Rokhlin [@Greengard_Rokhlin_1987] in 1987. \... (HISTORY)

The FMM is based on the idea of approximation using the structure of far
field interaction between particles to reveal a rank structure in the
interaction operator. This rank structure is exploited to reduce the
complexity of the matrix-vector product in the iterative solver from
$O(N^2)$ to $O(N)$, where $N$ is the number of particles in the system.
It is important to note that the matrix $A_{ij}$ is rarely formed in
practice, and the FMM is instead passed in as an operator to the
iterative solver.

## Special Quadratures for Weakly Singular Integrals
